_Editorial note_: The following is a kind of Cliff's Notes version of
[NAVADMIN 080/20](https://www.public.navy.mil/bupers-npc/reference/messages/Documents/NAVADMINS/NAV2020/NAV20080.txt),
which provides guidance to the Navy on how to handle the COVID-19 pandemic. This is 99% a restructuring of the source
NAVADMIN to hopefully make it easier to read and follow, though there is occasional editing or slight rewording to
try to keep the 'flow' logical. **THIS ANNOTATED VERSION IS PROVIDED IN THE HOPE THAT IT WILL HELP
WITH UNDERSTANDING, BUT IS NOT OFFICIAL NAVY POLICY -- REFER TO THE SOURCE NAVADMIN FOR OFFICIAL POLICY**.

----

# NAVADMIN 080/20

Navy Mitigation Measures in Response to Coronavirus Outbreak Update 3
(see message date-time group `212007Z MAR 20`)

(Released by Vice Admiral John B. Nowell, Jr, N1.)

See "[References](#references)" below for applicable references.

# Summary

This NAVADMIN supersedes references (a) through (c) and consolidates those
NAVADMINs into one NAVADMIN for ease of reference.  It also adds implementing
guidance in paragraph 3.H. for an Authorized Departure (AD) of DoD eligible
family members (EFMs) and civilian employees in line with references (d) and
(v).  This NAVADMIN contains measures to mitigate the spread of COVID-19
throughout the Navy enterprise and amplifies DoD and DoN direction for Service
Members and Navy civilians.  It summarizes and repeats applicable guidance
where appropriate so that this will serve as a one-stop information source.

Authorized travelers will adhere to the Force Health Protection Guidelines
(FHPG) as detailed throughout references (a) through (v) as summarized in this
NAVADMIN, and later guidance.

## Background

The DoD has transitioned to Phase Three (Respond) of reference (e), the global
campaign in response to the COVID-19 outbreak.  Our workforce is our first line
of defense.  All hands must proactively take action to ensure the health of our
force, and to ensure we mitigate the spread of COVID-19 in order to maintain
our readiness.

During the COVID-19 outbreak, the DoD and DoN will continue to protect and
preserve the operational effectiveness of forces worldwide in accordance with
(IAW) references (e) and (f).

Utilizing FHPG from the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness
(USD (P&R)) provided in references (g) and (q), USNORTHCOM is executing its
pandemic plan and geographic combatant commanders are executing their
supporting pandemic plans IAW reference (h).

In compliance with updated USD (P&R) FHPG issued in references (i) and (j),
Office of Chief Naval Operations (OPNAV) published initial reporting guidance
supporting DoD response to the COVID-19 outbreak in reference (k) and updated
that guidance in references (c), (l), and (m).

## Role of the CDC

As the leading U.S. government Public Health Agency, the CDC continues to
assess the risk of COVID-19 and to provide guidance for those residing in the
U.S. and traveling abroad.  Because CDC guidance is principally tailored for
persons residing in the U.S., some CDC COVID-19 guidance may have limited
applicability for commanders, particularly those outside the United States, and
is not recognized by other sovereign nations.

While DoD continues to follow the lead of the CDC, when needed, additional
military specific measures are authorized to mitigate risk to U.S.  forces
stationed or deployed around the world, and to protect Service Members, Navy
civilian employees, and their family members.  USD (P&R) FHPG issued in
reference (q) provides guidance for DoD personnel traveling during the novel
coronavirus outbreak.

## CDC Travel Health Advisories

The CDC provides travel health advisories at
[https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/travelers/index.html](https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/travelers/index.html).
The Advisory Levels are noted below and will be referenced in this NAVADMIN
(note that CDC warning levels **DO NOT** apply to the U.S.):

* Level 1  **Watch**, practice usual precautions (risk of limited community
  transmission)
* Level 2  **Alert**, practice enhanced precautions (sustained (ongoing) community
  transmission)
* Level 3  **Warning**, avoid nonessential travel (widespread sustained (ongoing)
  transmission)

## DoN Civilian Guidance

The DoN civilian workforce  more than 220,000 strong  plays an integral role in
supporting our Sailors and building, manning and maintaining our ships,
aircraft, and submarines.  Working shoulder to shoulder with our Service
Members, it is imperative to have alignment between Navy civilian and military
COVID-19 policy and guidance.  DoN civilian guidance is contained in references
(r) and (t) as well as this NAVADMIN.

## Military Health Protection Guidance.

The Secretary of Defense (SECDEF) provided explicit FHPG in references (g) and
(q) which is more restrictive than CDC guidance.  Commanders must read both
documents in their entirety and ensure they are following the actions spelled
out in this guidance.

Local Commanders can be more restrictive based on Command location, local
community transmission, risk to mission and risk to force.

Each and every Sailor must ensure they proactively manage and minimize
their personal risk to exposure, and that of their families.

Commands are charged with ensuring they track and monitor each Sailor and
aggressively follow SECDEF guidance in these references.

# Mission

All commands will take specific actions to mitigate the spread of COVID-19
worldwide and adhere to the policies and reporting requirements contained in
this NAVADMIN.

# Policy

This NAVADMIN applies to all Navy Service Members, Navy civilians, and their
families assigned to DoD installations world-wide.

## Travel "Stop Movement"

### OCONUS

In order to maintain force health protection, readiness of the force and
mitigate the risk of transmission among personnel, SECDEF directed an OCONUS
travel stop movement to affected countries and areas effective 13 Mar 2020 in
reference (s).

This includes all forms of travel (Permanent Change of Station (PCS),
Temporary Duty (TAD/TDY), and government-funded leave). For Service Members
this also includes personal leave and other non-official travel.

### Domestic Travel

On 13 March 2020 Deputy SECDEF directed a domestic travel stop movement in
reference (u).  In line with references (t) and (u), which provides domestic
travel guidance, all Service Members will stop movement and Navy civilian
personnel and family members whose transportation is government funded will
also stop movement.

The domestic travel stop movement applies to PCS and TAD/TDY, and Service
Members are only authorized local leave.  Until the domestic travel
restrictions prescribed above are lifted, Navy commands may only gain/onboard
civilian employees within the local commuting area.

The following domestic travel is authorized:

1. Travel by patients and medical providers for the purpose of medical
   treatment for Navy personnel and their family members
2. Individuals who have already initiated PCS or TDY travel (including
   intermediate stops) are authorized to continue to their final destination
   (see paragraphs "[Domestic PCS](#domestic-pcs-us-and-territories)" through
   "[Travel for Official Training](#travel-for-official-training)" for further
   amplification)
3. Individuals whose TDY and/or leave ends while this NAVADMIN is in effect
   are authorized to return to their home station at the end of their TDY
   and/or leave (see paragraph "[Other Official Overseas
   Travel](#other-official-domestic-travel)" through "[Personal Leave and
   Liberty](#personal-leave-and-liberty)" for further amplification)
4. Individuals pending retirement or separation during this period are exempt.

### Stop Movement Period of Effect

This stop movement (both overseas and domestic) will remain in effect until 11
May 2020.

## PCS

### Overseas PCS

Service Members, Navy civilians and dependents under OCONUS Permanent Change
of Station (PCS) orders to locations designated CDC COVID-19 Warning Level 3
or CDC COVID-19 Alert Level 2 will follow the guidance in this section. *Note
that CDC warning levels DO NOT apply to CONUS.*

#### Military and Dependent PCS Travel involving Warning Level 3 Locations

Service Members and their dependents under PCS orders **to** or **from** a
CDC COVID-19 Warning Level 3 location will **stop movement**. This policy
applies to currently designated CDC COVID-19 Warning Level 3 locations, or
those designated Level 3 at a later date.

* Service Members who have detached from their parent command prior to the
  date of this NAVADMIN and are in transit are directed to contact Navy
  Personnel Command (NPC) for follow-on guidance (see "[Points of
  Contact](#points-of-contact)").  NPC is standing by to address each specific
  case and will authorize entitlements based on current location and
  situation.

* Detaching and gaining commands shall make every effort to contact affected
  Service Members enroute to/from their command to advise them of the contents
  of this message.

#### Military and Dependent PCS Travel involving Alert Level 2 Locations

* For PCS orders to a CDC COVID-19 Alert Level 2 location:
    * *Service Members* under PCS orders to a CDC COVID-19 Alert Level 2 location
will execute orders.
    * *Dependents* of Service Members executing accompanied PCS
orders to a CDC COVID-19 Alert Level 2 location will *delay travel* to the CDC
COVID-19 Alert Level 2 location until 11 May 2020.  This policy applies to
currently designated CDC Alert Level 2 locations and those designated at a
later date.

* Service Members who have detached from their parent command prior to the
  date of this NAVADMIN and are in transit are directed to contact NPC for
  follow-on guidance (see "[Points of Contact](#points-of-contact)"). NPC is
  standing by to address each specific case and will authorize entitlements
  based on current location and situation.

* Detaching and gaining commands shall make every effort to contact affected
  Service Members enroute to/from their command to advise them of the contents
  of this message.

#### DoN civilian PCS travel involving Warning Level 3 Locations

Navy civilians and their dependents under PCS orders to or from a CDC COVID-19
Warning Level 3 location will **stop movement**.

This policy applies to currently designated CDC COVID-19 Warning Level 3
locations, or those designated Level 3 at a later date.  Contact your
supervisory chain of command for further guidance.

#### DoN civilian PCS travel involving Alert Level 2 Locations

* For PCS orders to a CDC COVID-19 Alert Level 2 location:
    * *Navy civilians* under PCS orders to a CDC COVID-19 Alert Level 2
location will execute orders.
    * *Dependents* of Navy civilians executing accompanied PCS orders to a CDC
COVID-19 Alert Level 2 location will delay travel to the CDC COVID-19 Alert
Level 2 location until 11 May 2020.

This policy applies to currently designated CDC Alert Level 2 locations and
those designated at a later date.

#### Postponement of non-essential civilian hiring involving travel

Additionally, until the travel restrictions are lifted Navy civilian hiring
actions for positions in Level 2 and Level 3 countries are postponed for
non-essential civilian personnel who have not yet begun travel. Contact your
supervisory chain of command for further guidance.

### Domestic PCS (U.S. and territories)

For PCS in the United States and its territories, Service
Members, Navy civilians and dependents under domestic PCS orders
will follow the guidance this in section.

#### Navy Civilians

All Department of the Navy civilian employees whose transportation is
government funded will stop movement.  Navy commands may continue civilian
hiring actions, but may only onboard civilian employees in the local commuting
area.  Contact your supervisory chain of command for further guidance.

#### Service Members

Service Members who have not yet initiated PCS travel as of the effective date
of this NAVADMIN (21 MAR 2020) are directed to contact NPC for follow-on
guidance (see "[Points of Contact](#points-of-contact)").  NPC is standing by
to address each specific case and will authorize entitlements based on current
location and situation.

* For Service Members who have already initiated PCS travel, detaching and
gaining commands shall make every effort to contact those Service Members to
advise them of the contents of this message.

##### Local PCS Moves

A local PCS move may be executed without
an exception since it does not involve travel outside of the local
area.

To be clear, same geographic location PCS moves will only be
executed with due regard to the operational readiness of the
commands involved:

* Losing and gaining commands are encouraged to coordinate with placement
  coordinators and detailers in PERS-4 as required.
* PERS-4 shall adjudicate same geographic location PCS move decisions in
  situations where losing and gaining commands do not agree on an execution
  timeline.
* This adjudication may be delegated, but no lower than the O-6 Division
  Director level at PERS-4.

## Other Official Overseas Travel

All other official travel by Service Members and Navy civilians (for meetings,
conferences, site visits, etc.) to or from a country designated as CDC
COVID-19 Warning Level 3 is prohibited and will require an exception (see
"[Exceptions](#exceptions)").

Navy Reserve personnel will follow guidance promulgated by the Chief of Navy
Reserves.

## Other Official Domestic Travel

All other official travel by Service Members and Navy civilians in the United
States is prohibited and will require an exception (see
"[Exceptions](#exceptions)").

Navy Reserve personnel will follow guidance promulgated by the Chief of Navy
Reserves.

## Travel for Official Training

Travel for official training (overseas or domestic):

### Travel for Training yet to commence

Service Member and Navy civilian travel to attend formal training will
require:

* An exception (see "[Exceptions](#exceptions)") **prior to** travel,
* Advance coordination with the training command, and
* Compliance with Navy Component Commander guidance concerning pre- and
  post-travel medical screening and reception procedures, to include
  restriction of movement (ROM) if applicable.

### Travel for Training already in progress

Service Members and Navy civilians currently under
PCS or TAD/TDY orders and attending training and/or schools will
complete their current training and/or school.

* For those on TAD/TDY orders, Service Members and Navy civilians are
  directed to contact the command that issued the orders for returning
  instructions/guidance.
* Navy civilians executing PCS orders are directed to contact the command
  that issued the orders for further guidance.
* Service Members executing PCS orders are directed to contact Navy
  Personnel Command for guidance and potential orders modification.

Once the current school/training is complete, Service
Members should expect to take one of the following actions (based on force
health protection considerations):

1. Return to their previous Permanent Duty Station (PDS),
2. Remain at the school/training site if prudent for health protection,
3. If the next school/training is in the same location and the course is still
   being offered, continue training and re-evaluate after school/training
   completion, or
4. Proceed to the ultimate PDS.

Throughout the process, Service Members should consult with their
affected command (current, losing or future) as well as their
detailer where applicable.

## Personal Leave and Liberty

### for Service Members

For personal leave and liberty (overseas and domestic), Commanding Officers
(CO) and officers-in-charge may authorize local leave IAW command policy for
Service Members.

Leave or personal travel outside of the local area, as defined by Commanding
Officers and officers in charge, requires an exception as outlined in
"[Exceptions](#exceptions)".

For those Service Members currently on leave, COs or
officers in charge are delegated authority to terminate leave early
or allow completion of leave as authorized based on location,
duration and risk to Service Member.

### for Navy Civilians

For Navy civilians, approval or denial of civilian annual leave requests will
be based on mission requirements. While intended travel outside the local
commuting area may be considered in determining impact to mission
requirements, leave requests for Navy civilians cannot be denied solely
because an employee is travelling outside of the local commuting area.

In line with reference (t) paragraph 3(b), Navy civilian employees are
strongly encouraged to avoid personal leave outside of the local area.

## Exceptions

**Individuals pending retirement or separation within the next 60 days are
exempt from this stop movement.**

Commanding officers and officers-in-charge may request an exception to the
requirements described in "[Policy](#policy)" in the following cases:

1. Determined to be mission essential,
    * Mission-essential travel refers to work that must be performed to ensure
      the continued operations of mission essential functions, as determined
      by the local Commander.
2. Necessary for humanitarian reasons, or
3. Warranted due to extreme hardship.

### Service Member stop movement exception approval

Navy Personnel Command (PERS-4) is authorized to approve or deny stop movement
exceptions for Service Member PCS travel under the "[Overseas
PCS](#overseas-pcs)", "[Domestic PCS](#domestic-pcs-us-and-territories)", and
"[Travel for Training in progress](#travel-for-training-already-in-progress)"
policies.

Approvals of exception requests shall be made via message traffic to all
concerned and will specify whether dependents are authorized to accompany the
Service Member. **Detaching Commander endorsement is required.**

Upon receipt of an approved exception, Transaction Service Center or Personnel
Support Detachment/personnel offices will process the Service Member for
transfer to the gaining command.

Send all exception requests to [pers451@navy.mil](mailto:pers451@navy.mil)
with the subject line `PCS EXCEPTION REQUEST`.

Exception request formats will be provided by PERS-4 and posted on
[MyNavy Portal](https://my.navy.mil/).

#### Medical screening for approved exceptions

Service Members who are granted an exception and are traveling from a CDC
COVID-19 Warning Level 3 or Alert Level 2 location will receive guidance from
NPC concerning Navy Component Commander pre- and post-travel medical screening
and reception procedures, to include ROM.

### Approval authorities for other Service Member travel exceptions

A Sailor's echelon 2 commander is delegated authority to approve or deny stop
movement exceptions in the case of:

1. Other official travel (meetings, conferences, site visits, etc.), including
   [overseas](#other-official-overseas-travel) and
   [domestic](#other-official-domestic-travel) travel, and
2. Official training, **not associated with a PCS**, under "[Travel for
   Official Training](#travel-for-official-training)", and
3. Leave requests that include travel outside of the local area in
   "[Personal Leave and Liberty](#personal-leave-and-liberty)".

The echelon 2 commander may further delegate exception authority, but no lower
than the first flag officer or Senior Executive Service (SES) civilian in the
chain of command of the Service Member.

#### Medical screening for approved exceptions

Those who are granted an exception will comply with the echelon 2 guidance
concerning pre- and post-travel screening and reception procedures.

### Exceptions for PCS of Navy civilians

Authority to approve or deny exceptions of Navy civilian PCS restrictions
civilians from outside the local commuting area, under the "[Overseas
PCS](#overseas-pcs)", "[Domestic PCS](#domestic-pcs-us-and-territories)"
policy, is delegated to the echelon 2 commander.

The echelon 2 commander may further delegate exception authority, but no lower
than the first flag officer or SES civilian in the chain of command of the
command or activity performing the hiring action.

#### Medical screening for approved exceptions

Those who are granted an exception will comply with the echelon 2 guidance
concerning pre- and post-travel screening and reception procedures.

### Exceptions for other official travel of Navy civilians

Authority to approve or deny stop movement
exceptions for Navy civilians in the case of:

1. Other official travel (meetings, conferences, site visits, etc.), including
   [overseas](#other-official-overseas-travel) and
   [domestic](#other-official-domestic-travel) travel, and
2. Official training, under "[Travel for Official
   Training](#travel-for-official-training)"

The echelon 2 commander may further delegate exception authority, but no lower
than the first flag officer or SES civilian in the Service Member or Navy
civilian employee chain of command.

#### Medical screening for approved exceptions

Those who are granted an exception will comply with the echelon 2 guidance
concerning pre- and post-travel screening and reception procedures.

## Authorized Departure

The Office of the Under Secretary of Defense
(Personnel and Readiness) has announced an Authorized Departure (AD)
as outlined in reference (d).

In line with reference (v), Navy Service Member eligible family members (EFMs)
(note, **not** "Exceptional Family Members" under the Exceptional Family
Member Program defined by OPNAVINST 1754.2F) and Department of the Navy
civilian employees who have determined they are at higher risk of a poor
health outcome if exposed to COVID-19 or who have requested departure based on
a commensurate justification in foreign areas as well as a civilian employee
and/or other eligible family members who may need to accompany them - are
authorized to depart their current duty station.

DoN civilian employees who wish to
depart their duty station must consult with their chain of command.

### Safe Haven Designation

The designated safe-haven for departing Service Member eligible family members
is the contiguous United States (US).  The designated safe-haven for departing
DoN civilian employees is Arlington, Virginia.

Members should work with their commands and local travel office to arrange for
transportation to their safe- haven.  Authorized departures are only permitted
when appropriate transportation and reception procedures are in place
consistent with reference (s).

Travelers should be aware that preventative health measures to include
restricted movement and business closures have been implemented in the United
States to various degrees by federal, state and local governments.  Travelers
shall be advised to check the restrictions applicable to their situation,
based on their departure location, any enroute locations (foreign and in the
United States) and their ultimate safe-haven, as well as availability of
lodging, prior to commencing travel.

IAW the Joint Travel Regulations (JTR), chapter 6, dependents must designate
their specific safe haven location in the United States upon, or prior to,
entry to the United States.  Once designated, the specific safe- haven cannot
be changed.

Dependents of uniformed personnel will be processed for safe-haven allowances
IAW with the JTR, Chapter 6, paragraph 0602.

DoN civilian employees and their eligible family members will be processed for
allowances IAW with the JTR, Chapter 6, paragraph 0604.

### Self-evaluation measures for Authorized Departers

It is strongly recommended that eligible family members and civilian employees
after traveling to, through and from a location with a Center for Disease
Control Travel Health Notice for COVID-19 take the following measures for the
next 14 days:

* Implement self-observations for symptoms of fever, cough or difficulty
  breathing
* Implement social distancing, e.g., remain out of congregate settings, avoid
  mass gatherings, and maintain 6 feet distance from others when possible
* If individuals feel feverish or develop measured fever, cough, or difficulty
  breathing, immediately self-isolate, limit contact with others, and seek
  advice by telephone from the appropriate healthcare provider to determine
  whether medical evaluation is required.

### General information on allowances under Authorized Departure

The following provides general information for
Service Member eligible family members regarding allowances. Members
are advised that the impact of this authorized departure on their
specific allowances is highly dependent on member individual
circumstances.  For questions regarding specific allowances, members
should contact their nearest Personnel Support Detachment or My Navy
Career Center (MNCC) or consult the JTR, chapter 6.

#### Per diem

Per diem:  Transportation expenses and travel per diem are authorized from the
time the family departs the evacuation site, through the time they reach their
selected safe haven location in the continental United States including
processing time at both the evacuation and receiving site.  A non-command
sponsored dependent is only authorized transportation and per diem.  Other
allowances will not be paid.

#### Escort allowances

Escort allowances:  Travel and transportation allowances are also payable to a
member, a U.S.  government civilian employee, or a person who travels under an
official travel authorization/order as an escort for an evacuated dependent
who is incapable of traveling alone to the safe haven due to age, physical or
mental incapacity, or other extraordinary circumstances.

#### Household Goods shipping

Household goods (HHG)/shipping allowance: upon a dependent departing for a
safe haven, unaccompanied baggage (for the dependent), and HHG items as needed
for dependent comfort and well-being, may be transported at government
expense.

#### Personally-owned Vehicle (POV) transportation

POV:  Transportation of a POV at government expense to a safe haven is not
authorized.

#### Pets

Pets:  A member is authorized transportation to the safe haven location
incident to an evacuation from a foreign PDS for up to two household pets
(defined by JTR 060204 as a cat or dog), which the member owned at the
evacuated foreign PDS (to include quarantine fees).

#### Housing allowances

Housing allowance:  A member, whose
command sponsored dependents are evacuated and who was authorized a
with dependent housing allowance on the evacuation date, continues
to be paid such allowance while the members PDS remains unchanged
and the member continues to maintain private sector housing, as long
as the command-sponsored dependents are receiving evacuation
allowances.

#### Family separation allowance

Family separation allowance (FSA):  A member is entitled to FSA if a member
has a dependent depart an overseas duty station at government expense because
of an evacuation and begins on the 31st day of dependent departure from the
PDS.

#### Disclaimers

The above listed allowances are not all inclusive
and may not be applicable in all cases.  Members are encouraged to
contact the MNCC to obtain information specific to their
circumstances.  **Receipts/records pertaining to evacuation should be
retained**.

## Actions to take upon completion of travel or exposure to COVID-19

Actions are required upon return from a CDC COVID-19 Alert Level 2 or higher
location, or if in close contact with a confirmed COVID-19 infection.

### Travel through a CDC Warning or Alert location

Service Members who travel or have traveled in the prior 14 days to or through
a CDC COVID-19 Warning Level 3 or Alert Level 2 location will immediately
notify their chain of command and be placed in a 14 day ROM status.

Immediate supervisors will not require Service Members to report to their duty
location or otherwise disregard the ROM.

Service Members will comply with reference (q) and Navy Component Commander
guidance concerning pre- and post-travel medical screening and reception
procedures to include ROM.

Commanders may, pursuant to DoD and Navy regulations and policies, authorize
telework opportunities, permissive TAD/TDY or work from home as necessary.

### Close contact with someone confirmed to have COVID-19

Service Members who have had close contact with someone with a confirmed
COVID-19 infection and feel sick with a fever, cough or difficulty breathing
shall:

* Inform their Senior Medical Department Representative immediately.
* Seek medical care immediately.  Before going to the office of a doctor or
  emergency room, call ahead to provide recent travel locations and symptoms.
* Avoid contact with others.
* Stay home except to get medical care.
* Cover mouth and nose with tissue or sleeve (not hands) when coughing or
  sneezing.

### Virtual Conferencing

All Navy personnel shall maximize
the conduct of virtual conferences, meetings and classes to the
fullest extent.  Holding conferences are strongly discouraged and
must be approved by a Navy Component Commander, Deputy Fleet
Commander, Task Force Commander or Navy Region Commander charged
with hosting the conference.

### Health Guidance

Compliance with CDC guidance is critical to minimize the spread of COVID-19.
All personnel shall:

* Wash hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, especially
  after going to the bathroom, before eating, and after blowing your nose,
  coughing or sneezing.  If soap and water are not readily available, use an
  alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60 percent alcohol.  Always wash
  hands with soap and water if hands are visibly dirty.
* Avoid close contact with people who are sick.
* Avoid touching your eyes, nose and mouth.
* Stay home when you are sick.
* Cover your cough or sneeze with a tissue, then throw the tissue in the
  trash.
* Clean and disinfect frequently touched objects and surfaces using a regular
  household cleaning spray or wipe.
* Maximize open doors within area with equivalent classification levels.
* Minimize meetings of more than five persons.

### Social Distancing

Practice social distancing.

### Large Gatherings

Minimize attendance at large group gatherings outside of the workplace (for
example shopping malls and restaurants with large attendance).

## Supplemental Guidance for Commanders

IAW reference (q), Commanders should identify and track all Service Members
who travel or have a history of travel in the prior 14 days.  This includes
travel by military or commercial means as well as private conveyance and
includes all forms of travel to include PCS, temporary duty and leave.
Commanders shall ensure Service Members implement the following actions for
the next 14 days:

* Implement self-observation, i.e., take temperature twice a day and remain
  alert for fever (>100.4 degrees F or 38 degrees C) and remain alert for
  fever, cough or difficulty breathing.
* To the extent possible implement social distancing, i.e., remain out of
  congregate settings, avoid mass gatherings and maintain 6 feet or 2 meter
  distance from others when possible.
* If individuals feel feverish or develop measured fever, cough or
  difficulty breathing, immediately self- isolate, limit contact with others
  and seek advice by telephone from the appropriate healthcare provider to
  determine whether medical evaluation is required.

### Personnel Travel and Screening

Commanders will adhere to DoD guidance for personnel traveling during the
novel coronavirus outbreak per reference (q) to include COVID-19 screening at
overseas military transportation terminals per reference (n).  Commanders will
review the supplemental risk-based measures and observe the operational risk
level mitigation actions for COVID-19 outlined in reference (f).

For individuals traveling OCONUS to OCONUS,
Commanders will ensure travel is mission essential and follow the
guidance listing in reference (s) if compelling exceptions are
necessary.  Military air crew are exempt from the requirements in
this NAVADMIN, but will ensure they actively practice social
distancing and prudent measures to mitigate potential contact and
COVID-19 transmission.

### Status of Forces Agreements

Commanders will comply with status of forces agreements when applicable.

### Reducing Rate of Infection Spread

Commanders should:

* Consider measures to place mission essential shore staffs on alternating day
  or split shift rotations.
* Use maximum latitude to authorize telework, liberal leave, permissive TDY as
  necessary to minimize spread within your teams.
* Implement social distancing techniques for any meetings you conduct.
* Ensure the health of your force by conducting regular screenings and
  restrict movement of those potentially infected with COVID-19.

## Entitlements

Changes to entitlements associated with a ROM have been approved and put in
place by DoD.  The entitlements include, but are not limited to:

* Per diem for Service Members and dependents directed to ROM after arrival at
  a duty station after a PCS move, and
* the implementation of Hardship Duty Pay (HDP)  ROM for members who incur
  unreimbursed lodging expenses when directed to ROM at their PDS.

Additionally, the Pay and Personnel Management Branch
(PERS-2) has released Pay and Personnel Information Bulletin (PPIB)
[20-05](https://www.public.navy.mil/bupers-npc/support/paypers/PASS/Documents/PPIB%202020/PPIB%202005.txt)
and
[20-06](https://www.public.navy.mil/bupers-npc/support/paypers/PASS/Documents/PPIB%202020/PPIB%202006.txt)
which provided Navy Pay Offices with information regarding recent JTR changes
regarding self-isolation and establishment of HDP-ROM.

Eligibility for entitlements varies based on individual circumstances.  If you
have questions about entitlements, please contact the MyNavy Career Center
(1-833-330-6622) or via e-mail at [askmncc@navy.mil](mailto:askmncc@navy.mil).

# Regular Reporting

For CONUS commands, ensure your points of contact (POC) submit accurate and
timely COVID-19 daily reports and Commander's Critical Information Requirements
(CCIRs) to USFFC, with an information copy to the local installation commander,
for consolidation and subsequent reporting to OPNAV.

For OCONUS commands, ensure your POCs submit accurate and timely COVID- 19
daily reports and CCIRs to the Navy Component Command/echelon 2 command, with
an information copy to the local installation commander, for consolidation and
subsequent reporting to OPNAV.

Given potential rapid escalation of case numbers and impact on
readiness, additional reporting is required.  Navy commands will
report the following through their chain of command and via OPREP
where appropriate:

## Daily Reports

COVID-19 daily reports, will include: COVID-19 Case Information broken
out by Active-Duty, DON Civilian, Military Family Members and Navy
Contractors as follows:

* Active-Duty:
    * Total Persons Under Investigation (PUI)
    * Positive Cases
    * Positive Cases in Home Isolation
    * Positive Cases in Hospital
    * Positive Cases Recovering Post-Hospitalization
    * Positive Cases Returned to Work
    * Deaths
* DoN Civilian:
    * Total Persons Under Investigation (PUI)
    * Positive Cases
    * Positive Cases in Home Isolation
    * Positive Cases in Hospital
    * Positive Cases Recovering Post-Hospitalization
    * Positive Cases Returned to Work
    * Deaths
* Family Members:
    * Total Persons Under Investigation (PUI)
    * Positive Cases
    * Positive Cases in Home Isolation
    * Positive Cases in Hospital
    * Positive Cases Recovering Post-Hospitalization
    * Deaths
* DoN Contractors:
    * Total Persons Under Investigation (PUI)
    * Positive Cases
    * Positive Cases in Home Isolation
    * Positive Cases in Hospital
    * Positive Cases Recovering Post-Hospitalization
    * Deaths

## CCIRs

* For COVID-19 Active-Duty Service Members and Navy
civilians only (in accordance with HIPAA and the Privacy Act):
    * Date individual identified as infected
    * Date individual admitted to hospital (if applicable)
    * Is individual in ICU?
    * Is individual on a ventilator?
    * Date individual is discharged
    * Date individual recovers
* The death of a Navy Service Member, Navy civilian, Navy contractor, or family member due to COVID-19.
* Any shortage of medical personal protective equipment (PPE) or test kits.
* Significant or newsworthy installation or facility closures.
* Unit or installation is unable to meet isolation requirements.
* Unit or installation is unable to meet operational requirements.
* Any local or regional change in health protection condition (HPCON).

# Points of Contact

* Service Members with questions regarding this stop movement or entitlements
for PCS travel should contact the MyNavy Career Center:
    * 1-833-330-6622 or
    * Email [ASKMNCC@navy.mil](mailto:ASKMNCC@navy.mil)
    * Detailers are ready to support all order modifications and commands
      should work with their placement officers.
* For Medical Questions, contact BUMED Watch:
    * 703-681-1087, 703-681-1125, or
    * Email [usn.ncr.bumedfchva.list.bumed---2019-ncov-response-cell@mail.mil](mailto:usn.ncr.bumedfchva.list.bumed---2019-ncov-response-cell@mail.mil)
* Reporting Requirements, contact OPNAV Battle Watch Captain:
    * 703-692-9284 or
    * Email [BWC.PTGN@navy.mil](mailto:BWC.PTGN@navy.mil)
* Navy civilians with questions regarding this guidance should contact their
  supervisory chain of command.

## NAVADMIN POCs

For information on this NAVADMIN, the points of contact are:

* RADM Karl Thomas, OPNAV N3N5B, 703-692-9291, [karl.o.thomas1@navy.mil](mailto:karl.o.thomas1@navy.mil)
* RADM Jeffrey Jablon, OPNAV N13, 703-604-5040, [jeffrey.jablon@navy.mil](mailto:jeffrey.jablon@navy.mil)
* RADM Gayle Shaffer, OPNAV N093B, 703-697-7399, [gayle.shaffer@med.navy.mil](mailto:gayle.shaffer@med.navy.mil)

# Other Guidance

The Navy will ensure the best possible Navy-wide Force Health Protection for
its Sailors, civilian employees and family members.  However, all members of
the Navy family must do their part by adhering to CDC guidelines as they
relate to basic hygiene and human interaction.  The Navy will remain focused
on meeting our global commitments while also ensuring the health and
well-being of our Service Members, Navy civilians and our families.

Our understanding of COVID-19 is rapidly evolving and this guidance will
continue to be evaluated as conditions change.  We recognize many of the
policies in this NAVADMIN will place a strain on our force, but they are
absolutely necessary to preserve our ability to conduct the mission.

Local Commanders will exercise prudent judgement when determining mission
essential travel and granting waivers and err on the side of conservatism.
This is not business as usual.  The expectation is that these exceptions are
done on a case by case basis and that they are very limited in number.

The entire team must understand their role in minimizing the spread of
COVID-19 among our ranks.  All efforts should be taken to combat the spread of
COVID-19 and to minimize impact on our force.  The Navy will remain focused on
meeting our global commitments while also ensuring the health and well-being
of our Service Members, Navy civilians and our families.

# Send Your Feedback, Use Your Judgment

As the COVID-19 situation continues to evolve, Commander feedback is an
important part of issuing revised or additional guidance.

It is virtually impossible to address all specific cases or situations.
However, Commanders have the latitude to adjust direction based upon their
unique situation.  For example, a unit that has been at sea for 14 days with
no COVID-19 cases may make the decision to relax social distancing
requirements until they pull into port.

Thank you for your leadership at the tip of the spear, wherever that may be.
We know that it is not easy and simply ask that you make the best call
possible. We will back you up.

# References

* Ref. A is [NAVADMIN 064/20](https://www.public.navy.mil/bupers-npc/reference/messages/Documents/NAVADMINS/NAV2020/NAV20064.txt), "Navy Mitigation Measures in response to Coronavirus Outbreak (overseas)".
* Ref. B is [NAVADMIN 065/20](https://www.public.navy.mil/bupers-npc/reference/messages/Documents/NAVADMINS/NAV2020/NAV20065.txt), "Navy Mitigation Measures in response to Coronavirus Outbreak Update 1 (domestic)".
* Ref. C is [NAVADMIN 074/20](https://www.public.navy.mil/bupers-npc/reference/messages/Documents/NAVADMINS/NAV2020/NAV20074.txt), "Navy Mitigation Measures in response to Coronavirus Outbreak Update 2".
* Ref. D is a 20 MAR 2020 memo from the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness, "Authorized Departure of Individuals at Higher Risk from COVID-19".
* Ref. E is Department of Defense (DoD) Global Campaign Plan for Pandemic Influenza and Infectious Disease (NORTHCOM OPLAN GCP-PI&AMP;ID-3551-13 dated 15 OCT 2013).
* Ref. F is DoD Instruction 6200.03, "Public Health Emergency Management Within the DoD".
* Ref. G is a 30 JAN 2020 memo from the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness, "Providing Force Health Protection Guidance for Personnel returning from China during the Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19) Outbreak".
* Ref. H is a 01 FEB 2020 SECDEF-approved EXORD that directs USNORTHCOM to execute its Pandemic Plan 3551-13 and supporting Geographic Combatant Commanders to execute their pandemic plans in response to the NCOV (COVID-19) Outbreak.
* Ref. I is a 07 FEB 2020 supplement (#1) to Ref. G (USD(P&amp;R)'s Force Health Protection Guidance).
* Ref. J is a 25 FEB 2020 supplement (#2) to Ref. G (USD(P&amp;R)'s Force Health Protection Guidance).
* Ref. K is [NAVADMIN 033/20](https://www.public.navy.mil/bupers-npc/reference/messages/Documents/NAVADMINS/NAV2020/NAV20033.txt), "OPNAV Reporting Guidance Supporting DoD Response to the COVID-19 Outbreak".
* Ref. L is [NAVADMIN 039/20](https://www.public.navy.mil/bupers-npc/reference/messages/Documents/NAVADMINS/NAV2020/NAV20039.txt), "Updated DoD Guidance for Monitoring Personnel returning from China during the Novel Coronavirus Outbreak".
* Ref. M is [NAVADMIN 058/20](https://www.public.navy.mil/bupers-npc/reference/messages/Documents/NAVADMINS/NAV2020/NAV20058.txt), "Updated Navy Guidance during the Novel Coronavirus Outbreak".
* Ref. N is Joint Staff message for DoD, "COVID-19 Passenger Screening Guidelines for Overseas Military Transportation Terminals" (dated 05 MAR 2020).
* Ref. O is a Joint Staff memo (dated 06 MAR 2020) "Force Health Protection Guidance to Mitigate the Risk of COVID-19 Transmission".
* Ref. P is a 10 MAR 2020 memo from Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness, "Providing Force Health Protection Guidance for the Use of Personal Protective Equipment and non-pharmaceutical interventions during the Coronavirus Disease 2019 Outbreak".
* Ref. Q is a 11 MAR 2020 memo from Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness, "Providing Force Health Protection Guidance for Personnel Traveling during the Novel Coronavirus Outbreak".
* Ref. R is [ALNAV 025/20](https://www.public.navy.mil/bupers-npc/reference/messages/Documents/ALNAVS/ALN2020/ALN20025.txt), "Force Health Protection Guidance for the Department of the Navy".
* Ref. S is a 11 MAR 2020 memo from Secretary of Defense for Travel Restrictions for DoD Components in response to Coronavirus Disease.
* Ref. T is [ALNAV 026/20](https://www.public.navy.mil/bupers-npc/reference/messages/Documents/ALNAVS/ALN2020/ALN20026.txt), "Official and Personal Domestic Travel Force Health Protection Guidance for Department of the Navy (CONUS Travel Guidance)".
* Ref. U is a 13 MAR 2020 memo from Deputy Secretary of Defense, "Stop Movement for Domestic Travel for DoD Components in response to Coronavirus Disease 2019".
* Ref. V is a 21 MAR 2020 memo from ASN (M&amp;RA) on Authorized Departure for Individuals at Higher Risk from COVID-19.
