NAVADMIN 059/19

# MyNavy Portal Advancement Dashboard Launch

This NAVADMIN announces the release of the [E4-E6
Enlisted Advancement Dashboard in MyNavy Portal
(MNP)][eaw].  The E4-E6 Advancement Dashboard is a
web-based dashboard on MNP located on the Advancement
and Promotion Career and Life Event (CLE) page.

## MNP Enlisted Advancement Dashboard

The Dashboard provides E4-E6 candidates a detailed view
of their eligibility status for advancement with
instructions and documentation to prepare for the
advancement process, to give enlisted Sailors a more
transparent view into the advancement process and
increased ability to self-service resources to study
for the Navy-wide Advancement Exam.  The E4-E6
Advancement Dashboard provides access to the following
self-service capabilities:

1.  A view into eligibility status based on MyRecord
and their Enlisted Advancement Worksheet (EAW)
2.  Ability to calculate their final multiple score
3.  Ability to auto-populate Advancement Exam
checklists and a timeline of action items for
advancement
4.  Guidance for obtaining study materials, frequently
asked questions and knowledge management articles
related to advancement information
5.  Ability to review and understand advancement
eligibility
6.  Ability to submit inquiries through the service
request feature on MNP

### Expansion to CPOs

An expansion to the Advancement Dashboard to cover
E7-E9 candidates will follow.  More features will be
rolling out as the EAW becomes available in fall of
2019 and the Professional Military Knowledge Exam is
automated.

### Additional Features

Additional recent upgrades in MNP include:

1. MyRecord Web Through the MyRecord tab, Sailors can
now access their Official Military Personnel File and
their security clearance data.  Additionally, enlisted
Sailors can view Career Waypoints through MNP.  These
features allow Sailors to better manage their careers.

2. Proxy Scheduling Staff, supervisors and
administrators now have the ability to schedule
requests for language testing or educational counseling
on behalf of Sailors by using the Voluntary Education
Proxy Scheduling.  The feature provides greater
efficiency in managing and assisting Sailors to fulfill
their educational requirements.

### Screenshots and Video

(**LISTED FOR SAMPLE PURPOSES ONLY**)

For more information, including screenshots and a
demonstration video, please see the Navy.mil story
at https://www.navy.mil/insert-link-here

## Feedback

We want to hear from you!  Please use the Feedback
button on MNP or contact MyNavy Career Center (MNCC).
MNCC agents can walk you through the process of
viewing, updating and verifying your EAW. Please e-mail
MNCC at askmncc(at)navy.mil or call 1-833-330-MNCC
(833-330-6622) for assistance.

## Points of Contact

| Name / Contact Info        | Org       | Feature              |
|----------------------------|-----------|----------------------|
| CAPT David Whitehead       | BUPERS-3  | Assignment Dashboard |
|   david.whitehead@navy.mil |           |                      |
|   (432) 823-1234 / DSN 688 |           |                      |
| CAPT Ian Branum            | OPNAV N16 | MyRecord             |
|   ian.branum@navy.mil      |           |                      |
|   (432) 823-1234 / DSN 688 |           |                      |
| CDR Robert Stockton        | NETC      | Proxy Scheduling     |
|   robert.stockton@navy.mil |           |                      |
|   (432) 823-1234 / DSN 688 |           |                      |

## Authority for this NAVADMIN

(**LISTED FOR SAMPLE PURPOSES ONLY**)

This NAVADMIN was released by Vice Admiral R. P. Lastname, N1.

## References

This NAVADMIN contains hyperlinks, but no other references

[eaw]: https://mnp.navy.mil/
[navy-blog]: https://www.navy.mil/insert-link-here
